Good morning. You're reading the Up First newsletter.Subscribehere to get it delivered to your inbox, andlistento the Up First podcast for all the news you need to start your day.
The GOP-led Senate returns from recess today with hopes to pass legislation to enact a multi-trillion-dollar budget planin a few weeks. The proposed plan carries the bulk of President Trump's domestic policy agenda, which includes tax cuts and sweeping changes to defense, energy and immigration policy. Congressional Republicans want the bill on thepresident's desk by July 4. To accomplish this, they'll need to navigate a long list of competing demands.
FILE—In a show of Republican unity, Speaker of the House Mike Johnson, R-La., left, and Senate Majority Leader John Thune, R-S.D., make statements to reporters ahead of vote in the House to pass a bill on President Donald Trump's top domestic priorities of spending reductions and tax breaks, at the Capitol in Washington, Thursday, April 10, 2025. Now that the bill has passed the House, Thune and Senate Republicans can afford to lose only three Republican senators and still pass the Trump's spending plan. (AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite, File)J. Scott Applewhite/AP/APhide caption
A man is in custody after numerous people participating in a walk and vigil for Israeli hostages being held by Hamas were attackedand burned at an event in Boulder, Colo., yesterday. Authorities say the man,identified as 45-year-old Mohamed Sabry Soliman, yelled "free Palestine" before using a makeshift flame-thrower. Multiple people were hospitalized, and Soliman is expected to face charges.
A new round of Russian-Ukrainian peace talks is expected today in Istanbul, Turkey.The meeting comes a day after Ukraine hit Russia with a series of remote drone strikes on military air bases deep inside Russian territory. Ukraine was able to smuggle drones deep into Russia by hiding them in the tops of flatbed trucks, which parked near military bases before the drones lifted off to attack planes on the runway. Russia also launched over 470 drones and missiles over the weekend at targets across Ukraine.
Female doctor giving the coronavirus vaccine to a young pregnant woman. Antibodies, immunize population. side effects, risk people, antibodies, new normal, covid-19.stefanamer/Getty Images/iStockphotohide caption
Health and Human Services Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. has removed the COVID vaccine from the list of vaccines recommended for healthy pregnant women. However, existing guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other researchers still categorize pregnant women as a high-risk group that should receive booster shots. The sciencebacks up the researchers.
Jessica Slice with her two children.Jessica Slicehide caption
Living Better is aspecial seriesabout what it takes to stay healthy in America.
After she was diagnosed with postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, an autonomic nervous system disorder, Jessica Slice embraced a new identity: a person with a disability. Becoming disabled radically altered her life in ways that are both challenging and empowering. Then she became a mom. Slice's book,Unfit Parent: A Disabled Mother Challenges An Inaccessible World, discusses her experience as a parent with a disability and embracing interdependence. NPR spoke with Slice about her perspective, which canbenefit all parents.
Stephanie Case won an ultramarathon race in Wales, running more than 60 miles over rough terrain — and stopping three times to breastfeed her 6-month-old baby, Pepper.Rich Gillhide caption
This newsletter was edited bySuzanne Nuyen.