Good morning. You're reading the Up First newsletter.Subscribehere to get it delivered to your inbox, andlistento the Up First podcast for all the news you need to start your day.
President Trump travels today to Pittsburgh to celebrate a partnership between United States Steel and the Japanese company Nippon Steel.Former President Joe Biden blocked the sale on national security grounds, and, as a presidential candidate, Trump also promised to block it. However, after Trump ordered a national security review of the proposed plan last month, the president announced he was on board last week. He stated it would add $14 billion to the U.S. economy and create at least 70,000 jobs.
The logo of Japan's largest steel manufacturer Nippon Steel corporation is seen in front of the company's head office in Tokyo on April 10.Kazuhiro Nogi/AFP via Getty Imageshide caption
Harvard University can continue enrolling international students after a judge issued a preliminary injunction yesterday.For now, the Trump administration's efforts to revoke the university's ability to enroll students on international visas have been halted. The federal judge, Allison D. Burroughs,voiced concernsthat the government was attempting to prevent foreign students from enrolling despite her earlier order blocking the administration's planned actions. The White House told NPR that the Trump administration should decide if universities can issue student visas, not judges.
Elon Musk is leaving his role as the leader of the Department of Government Efficiency todayafter facing legal challenges, clashes with Cabinet members and little evidence to support claims of savings. He will join Trump at the White House for a final press conference,capping a 130-day tenure.
Using sunscreen plays a key role in protecting skin from ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun.Namthip Muanthongthae/Getty Imageshide caption
Using sunscreen plays a key role in protecting skin from ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun.
Each year in the U.S., about 84,000 people are diagnosed with and over 8,000 people die from melanoma, a type of skin cancer. Using sunscreen plays a vital role in protecting the skin. Choosing the right sunscreen is important, but avoiding common mistakes is even more crucial. Check out these dermatologist-approved tips tooptimize your skin protection:
Here's what else you should avoid whenprotecting your skin.
Clockwise left to right: Ana de Armas as Eve inBallerina. Elio (voiced by Yonas Kibreab) and a liquid supercomputer (voiced by Shirley Henderson) in the new Pixar movieElio. Archie Madekwe and Théodore Pellerin inLurker. David Corenswet as Superman. Danielle Deadwyler in40 Acres.  Aubrey Plaza as MG Falcone and Margaret Qualley as Honey O'Donahue inHoney Don't!Murray Close/Lionsgate, Disney/Pixar, MUBI, Alon Amir/Warner Bros. Pictures, Magnolia Pictures, Focus Features.hide caption
Check out whatNPRis watching, reading and listening to this weekend:
🍿 Movies:Hollywood's blockbuster season is upon us with everything fromJurassic World RebirthtoThe Fantastic Four: First Stepshitting the big screen. Here are11 titles to watch out for.
📺 TV:Sarah Silverman's comedy specialPostMortemwas a cathartic release for her as she found a way to talk about her dad and stepmom's deaths. They died nine days apart in 2023.
📚 Books:Jessica Stanley'sConsider Yourself Kissedtells the relatable tale of a woman who seems to have it together but feels like she's lost herself in the process. Here are four other books that werereleased this week.
🎵 Music:In a conversation withAll Songs Considered, Sufjan Stevens, who has released the 10th anniversary edition ofCarrie & Lowell, shares a complex view of the album he wrote about his mother after her death from cancer. Read about more of thebest albums released today.
🎮 Gaming:Elden Ring: Nightreignhas intense expeditions that demand tight three-player coordination and can be a joy for co-op fans, NPR's James Perkins Mastromarino says in his review.
❓ Quiz:I only got two questions wrong and learned that I know a lot more than I thought I did. I am passing off this same energy to you as youconquer this test. And, if you are not only feeling smarter than me, but smarter than a 13-year-old, try thisspelling bee test.
GENEVA, SWITZERLAND - MAY 18: Strike Out Snakebite (SOS) – a newly launched global initiative – unveils the 'snakeover' – a series of artworks highlighting the critical need for action against snakebite envenoming at the 78th World Health Assembly, Park Mon Repos on May 18, 2025 in Geneva. Featured artwork by Mr Finbar - The Cobra.Owen Davies/Getty Images/Getty Images Europehide caption
This newsletter was edited bySuzanne Nuyen.