Title: Starting Your Podcast: A Guide For Students
URL: https://www.npr.org/2018/11/15/662070097/starting-your-podcast-a-guide-for-students
Author: None
Publish Time: 2023-01-06T12:09:00-05:00
Summary: New to podcasting? Don't panic.
Word Count: 1024
Crawl Time: 2025-05-30T19:35:03.209982
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

And even though this is a contest, it's also about learning new skills in a fun way. We want to make that learning easier — so we've put together a guide to help you along the way.

Enlarge this image








        
        LA Johnson/NPR
        
    













            
            LA Johnson/NPR

Before we get started, we know you might have a few questions. Let's talk about a few basics.

Think about sound. We're challenging you to work with sounds — interviews, narration and recorded sounds from the world around you.

How many people do we need, and what roles are involved?

You can divide up these duties in a way that makes sense for the size of your team. You might decide to have multiple people host and multiple people work as producers.

What does it mean to mix audio?

Mixing is the process of editing and arranging audio clips in a way that sounds seamless and natural to a listener. After you and your team record sounds from interviews, events or other sources, you'll need to arrange them in a sound-editing software, like Audacity, which you can download online free of charge.

I've been reading lots of training guides that use tons of words I don't know. Help!

You can record sounds, conversations or interviews with sound recording apps on your smartphone.

You can also use your phone's built-in recording app. If you've got an iPhone, go to your "utilities" folder and click on "voice memos" to begin recording.

You'll want to make sure you have enough storage on your phone to do this and that you can either email the sound file to yourself or plug your phone into the computer to upload the recording.

NPR has a handy guide to recording audio with your phone. You can find it here. And here's another: Check out the YR Media guide How to Record High-Quality Audio With Your Phone.

NPR has a handy guide to recording audio with your phone. You can find it here. And here's another: Check out the YR Media guide How to Record High-Quality Audio With Your Phone.

NPR has a handy guide to recording audio with your phone. You can find it here. And here's another: Check out the YR Media guide How to Record High-Quality Audio With Your Phone.

If you're recording a person speaking, hold the phone a few inches from his or her mouth. Not too close, but not more than a few inches away, either.

2. A computer with sound editing software

If your school already provides editing software on the computers, feel free to use that. If not, we recommend Audacity, which is a free software download available online. You can download it here. As you learn to use it, lots of tutorials are available from Audacity.

The team at YR Media has put together a video about recording sound and setting up equipment. Check it out here.

The team at YR Media has put together a video about recording sound and setting up equipment. Check it out here.

The team at YR Media has put together a video about recording sound and setting up equipment. Check it out here.

Let's take a few minutes to hear a few examples. As you listen, think about the different ways that these segments are structured. Is there a host? Is it an interview style — or is a narrator telling a story, with clips of interviews in between?

Morning Edition: Reporting Live From Miami: A Bunch Of Fourth-Graders Tell Their Teacher's Story

Hidden Brain: The Haunting Effects of Going Days Without Sleep

Hidden Brain: How Labels Can Affect People's Personalities and Potential

How I Built This: Instagram: Kevin Systrom & Mike Krieger

Now that you've listened to a few examples, start to gather ideas. We've given you a few prompts to get you thinking. They aren't required, but you may choose to use them.

If you're telling a story, it may help to think of the parts of the story in separate sections. Check out this guide to structuring your story — and another about telling a story in three acts.

If you're telling a story, it may help to think of the parts of the story in separate sections. Check out this guide to structuring your story — and another about telling a story in three acts.

If you're telling a story, it may help to think of the parts of the story in separate sections. Check out this guide to structuring your story — and another about telling a story in three acts.

Now it's time to start thinking about the sounds that you'll use. Regardless of how your project is structured, it helps to feature a variety of sounds.

Compile a list of sounds you'd like to record — and bring that list with you when you go into the field.

Here are a couple of examples of radio pieces that use sounds to add to the story.

Listen to this "Radio Field Trip" from New Hampshire Public Radio. What sounds do you hear? There's narration from the show's host, Rick Ganley — but there's a lot more than that.

And here's this one, from Radio Rookies, a series from WNYC. Listen to the sounds that Radio Rookie Edward uses and weaves between his narration.

Clarify the terms of the interview.

Meet somewhere quiet (unless you want to record the noise!).

Ask the interviewee to introduce himself or herself on tape.

Remember: It's normal to be nervous. The person you're interviewing is probably nervous, too. It helps to be prepared. The better you know your questions and the better you know your equipment, the better you'll feel.

Make sure you set aside time to:

Do you have the ears of an audio producer at NPR?

Do you have the ears of an audio producer at NPR?

Do you have the ears of an audio producer at NPR?

Download a checklist for field recording here to take with you when you're getting ready to head out to record.

Here's another tip: Keep the frogs out of your throat by keeping a glass of water next to you while you're recording.