Title: About The Code Switch Team
URL: https://www.npr.org/blogs/codeswitch/2013/04/05/176351804/about-us
Author: None
Publish Time: 2024-01-04T11:42:00-05:00
Summary: Meet the team behind Code Switch, NPR's race, ethnicity and culture podcast.
Word Count: 770
Crawl Time: 2025-05-30T20:05:34.541445
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Enlarge this image








        
        NPR
        
    













            
            NPR

We're a multiracial, multigenerational group of journalists who explore how race affects every part of society — from politics and pop culture to history, food and everything in between.

Gene began his career as an assistant at the New York Times before helping launch HuffPost's Black Voices as managing editor. He went on to found the award-winning politics and culture blog PostBourgie before joining NPR in 2012. Gene is a native of South Philadelphia and an avid runner. He hopes to stay healthy long enough to see his beloved Sixers win an NBA championship.

You can read Gene's stories here, and follow him on X at @geedee215.

B.A. Parker is a co-host of NPR's Code Switch. She joined the team in July of 2022 and has expertly covered racial trauma in horror films, honoring her ancestors, and the myth behind self-care.

In a previous life, Parker was a film professor at Morgan State University and Stevenson University, where she forced 19-year-olds to watch Point Break and Wong Kar-wai films.  She then found her way to a production fellowship with This American Life, which she still can't believe happened. She has also been a guest host of NPR's It's Been a Minute and has produced for NPR's Invisibilia, Gimlet's Heavyweight and WNYC's Nancy. In 2019, she was selected for the Third Coast Radio Residency at Ragdale.

Parker hails from Baltimore, and currently lives in Brooklyn, NY. You can hear some of her ramblings here, and follow her @aparkusfarce on IG and X.

Lori Lizarraga is the co-host of Code Switch. Before public radio, Lori's career was in television. Her work as a local news reporter and evening anchor took her to newsrooms in Texas, California, Colorado, Pennsylvania, and abroad on international assignment in Ecuador to become an Emmy and Murrow award-winning broadcast reporter. She left local TV news in 2021 to pursue race and justice reporting full time as an independent journalist. Her investigative reporting during the COVID-19 pandemic uncovered discrimination in local news that resulted in new standards of immigration coverage at newsrooms across the country.

In 2022, Lori became co-host of Code Switch at NPR, bringing her background in breaking news and a reputation for covering under-reported communities – particularly Latinos in the U.S. – to public radio.

You can listen to Lori's work here, and follow her on social media at @lorilizarraga.

Dalia Mortada is the managing editor and showrunner of Code Switch. She's a (racially ambiguous) child of Syrian immigrants who's lived on three continents and has spent her life straddling cultures, languages, and lived experiences.

Before joining the Code Switch massive in 2022, she developed editorial strategy for NPR's listening app, edited for NPR's Morning Edition and spent many (literally) sleepless nights editing Up First. She joined NPR in 2018 after living in Istanbul, Turkey, for seven years, where she reported on the Syrian war and refugee crisis, Turkish politics and society, food, fashion, music and more. In her life beyond work, you'll likely find Dalia outside (usually in the mountains) and/or cooking.

You can read Leah's stories here, and follow her on X at @AskLeezul.

Christina Cala is Code Switch's senior producer. She's a proud Colombiana who strives to put more languages, more accents, and more ways of telling stories in ears everywhere. There's a special spot in her heart for stories about immigrant and indigenous communities, social and climate justice, and all things poetic or musical.

Before coming to Code Switch, she produced and sometimes edited the TED Radio Hour and All Things Considered. Her reporting on the US-Mexican border was part of a 2019 Edward R. Murrow award-winning package. She's an inaugural Edit Mode fellow and a co-founder of NPR's MGIPOC mentorship program. In 2021, she ran Code Switch's reporting fellowships. When not working, she can be found backpacking, taking all too many pictures, reading a novel a week or making pottery.

You can listen to Christina's stories here.

You can find Jess's stories here.

Before working in journalism, Xavier worked in the non-profit world in Queens, NY, where he was raised and currently resides. He is a fan of the beach, long walks, sad music, cats, and raccoons.

You can follow him on X at @xalopez.

Veralyn Williams (she/her) is the executive producer of  Code Switch and It's Been a Minute. She's Peabody and Edward R. Murrow award-winning journalist who has been asking hard questions about our world since she picked up her first microphone in 2004.

Want to pitch us? Here's how. And if you're wondering what it means to "code-switch," you'll probably find this helpful.