An abandoned vehicle sits along the Swannanoa River in a landscape scarred by Hurricane Helene, on March 24, near Swannanoa, N.C.Sean Rayford/Getty Imageshide caption
June 1 marks the start of hurricane season in the Atlantic Ocean. Forecasters are warning this year could once again bring anabove-average numberof storms. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is predicting13 to 19 named stormsbetween June 1 and Nov. 30, compared with an average of 14 storms per yearfrom 1991-2020.
Warmer ocean temperatures are contributing to more storms, NOAA said in its May forecast, becausemore heatmeans more energy to fuel activity.
Experts say people should prepare well ahead of time — even if they live inland.
"It takes only one storm near you to make this an active season for you,"professor Michael Bell, who leads Colorado State University's Tropical Cyclones, Radar, Atmospheric Modeling, and Software Team, said in a statement.
Even storms that don't turn into hurricanes can cause deadly floods, and experts say water-related hazards cause most deaths related to hurricanes that make landfall.
"We want people now to take the advantage of the opportunity to best prepare, both at the coast and then also well inland, where serious impacts from flooding and wind and tornadoes can occur as well as a tropical storm or hurricane moves inland,"Jon Porter, AccuWeather chief meteorologist, said in a video forecast on Friday.
Scientists sayclimate changemeans storms are dumping more water and bringing more rain and damagefurther away from the coast.
"Hurricanes can have significant inland impacts," Michael Brennan, director of NOAA's National Hurricane Center, said at a press conference on Friday. "It's important to get that message out to inland communities, especially in flood-prone areas, because that freshwater flooding has been such a significant source of fatalities in recent years."
As this year's hurricane season neared, the Trump administration targeted weather and climate research. It fired hundreds of NOAA employees and proposedhundreds of millions of dollars in funding cutsat the agency for 2026, including gutting climate research and slashing funds for satellites that provide critical data for weather forecasts.
Fired employees told NPR they fear the cuts willundermine improvements in hurricane forecasting, even as storms are getting more dangerous.
The National Weather Service, which is part of NOAA, has lost more than500 workersthrough the cuts by the Elon Musk-ledDepartment of Government Efficiencyand the departure of those who took the government's early retirement offer.
One of them is Brian LaMarre, who was a NWS meteorologist in the Tampa Bay area until he took early retirement in April.
"I don't think the current situation is sustainable,"LaMarre told NPR's Scott Simonon May 24. "When you have 122 offices and many of them are short-staffed … that right there is a recipe for disaster when you look at the long-range forecast."
In May,Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick saidNOAA and the NWS were using "the most advanced weather models and cutting-edge hurricane tracking systems to provide Americans with real-time storm forecasts and warnings." He added: "With these models and forecasting tools, we have never been more prepared for hurricane season." NOAA is a part of the Department of Commerce.
"We're ready here, and that's what I can speak to is, directly, the readiness of us and our staff here at the National Hurricane Center," the NHC's Brennan said on Friday. "We're ready to meet the needs of the [emergency management] community across the country as they come up this hurricane season, just as we always are."
NOAA says six to 10 of 2025's forecast storms are expected to become full-blown hurricanes — with winds of 74 mph or higher — and three to five could be major hurricanes, with winds of 111 mph or above.
That's in line with predictions from other forecasters, including atColorado State University, who said in April they expect 17 named storms and nine hurricanes, andAccuWeather, who are forecasting 13 to 18 named storms and seven to 10 hurricanes.
In 2024, there were18 named Atlantic storms, andfive hurricanesthat made landfall in the U.S. That includedHurricane Helene, which killed more than200 peopleand caused devastating flooding across the southeastern U.S., andHurricane Milton, whose storm surge and accompanying tornadoes in southern Florida caused$34.3 billionin damage, according to NOAA.
This year'snames, chosen by the World Meteorological Organization, are: