This picture taken from the grounds of the Ahli Arab Hospital, also known as the Maamadani (Baptist) Hospital, shows a cloud of smoke erupting following Israeli bombardment on a building in the Daraj neighbourhood of Gaza City on May 31, 2025.Omar AL-QATTAA/AFP via Getty Imageshide caption
A new White House proposal for a ceasefire in Gaza that's been accepted by Israel is now facing pushback from Hamas, in a development a top U.S. diplomat is calling "unacceptable."
The proposal, which includes a 60-day ceasefire, is the latest attempt by the U.S. to end the fighting in Gaza that's been raging for nearly 20 months since Hamas launched a surprise attack against Israel in late 2023.
Hamas has agreedto the 60-day ceasefire and said it would release 10 living and 18 deceased hostages in exchange for Israel releasing a number of Palestinian prisoners. But the militant group said it doesn't want to release all of the hostages at the same time, in order to ensure that Israel abides by the entire length of the ceasefire.
Hamas also said it wants guarantees for negotiations toward a permanent end to the war and the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Gaza.
Steve Witkoff, the U.S. Special Envoy to the Middle East, said Saturdayin a post on Xthat Hamas' response to the U.S. proposal was "totally unacceptable and only takes us backward."
He added: "Hamas should accept the framework proposal we put forward as the basis for proximity talks, which we can begin immediately this coming week."
People take part in a protest demanding the end of the war and immediate release of hostages held by Hamas in the Gaza Strip, and against Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's government, in Tel Aviv, Saturday, May 31, 2025.Ariel Schalit/APhide caption
Bassem Naim, a senior Hamas official, wrote in a post on WhatsApp over the weekend that the group had not rejected Witkoff's proposal. Rather, Nain said the group had come to an agreement with Witkoff on a possible ceasefire proposal but that Israel's response had differed from that agreement.
"Why, each time, is the Israeli response considered the only response for negotiation?" he wrote.
White House Press Secretary Karoline Leavitt said on Thursday that Israel had signed off on the Trump administration's latest ceasefire proposal before it was sent to Hamas.
Witkoff said the proposal also included the return of half of the living and deceased hostages still in Gaza, as well as further talks over a permanent ceasefire.
Hamas isseeking to avoid a repeatof the last ceasefire, when the group released hostages but Israel did not enter talks to permanently end the war, NPR's Daniel Estrin has reported. Hamas now wants to release hostages over time to keep Israel at the bargaining table.
A young Palestinian waits to collect donated food at a food distribution kitchen in Deir al-Balah, Gaza Strip, Friday, May 30, 2025.Abdel Kareem Hana/APhide caption
Hamas also opposes a new system to deliver humanitarian aid in Gaza, set up by the U.S and Israel using a private American company, whichbegan operationslast week. Gaza's Health MinistrysaidSunday that 31 civilians were killed when they went to obtain aid in Rafah, but the Israel Defense Forcessaidthat "false reports" had been circulating and that the IDF "did not fire at civilians while they were near or withi the humanitarian aid distribution site."
About 1,200 people were killed in the Hamas attack against Israel, the Israeli government said, and since then more than 54,000 Palestinianshave been killedby Israeli forces, according to Gaza health officials.
NPR's Daniel Estrin, Hadeel Al-Shalchi and Carrie Kahn contributed reporting.